DATA 607 Final Project
Team: R2R3
Jai Jeffryes, Nicholas Chung, Tamiko Jenkins 

Proposal
 
Assessment of the state of science is a requirement for
research. Assessment of intellectual property is a requirement for
capitalization of knowledge for profit. This project explores tools
for surveying patent data and research data in order to develop
methods for making these assessments.
 
The project begins with an examination of data from NASA, whose open
data portal includes a dataset of NASA patents. The format is a
delimited text file. The data include a patent case number and
title. Exploration of this dataset may include unsupervised learning
to yield topics of patents.
 
The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) publishes The WIPO
Manual on Open Source Patent Analytics with instruction for data
interrogation useful for subsequent parts of this project. The project
will continue with a more detailed exploration of patent cases opened
by NASA or another science-focused organization with a view to revealing more topics from within patent case data other than the title of the case, perhaps from the patent application, for example.
 
There are at least two data sources for patent data. The primary data
source is the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), whose Open
Data Portal publishes many datasets in various formats. USPTO also
supplies APIs for patent data retrieval. Besides these APIs, there is
at least one potentially useful third party API called PatentsView.
 
One resource for research publications is the Public Library of
Science (PLOS), who publish open access peer reviewed articles. The
inventory of articles seems limited, but appears to enable an
introduction to text mining of research papers. This project will take
some of the interesting topics identified in its earlier parts and
search for research articles related to those topics. Text mining of
PLOS will utilize an R package not covered in class, rplos, which
provides a programmatic interface to the Solr based search API
provided by PLOS. Solr is an open source search platform built on
Apache Lucerne.
 
For the instructor phone discussion:
The motivation for this project relates to methods for Information
Retrieval and the team’s collective interest and experience in startup and scientific industries. A suggestion of a meaningful statistical analysis germane
to this project would be welcome, if required. On the other hand, efficient topic modelling can form the foundation of a number of advanced NLP techniques such as Word sense disambiguation, Natural Text Generation, and automatic Summarization on its own. A number of derivative analysis are possible based on NLP, including studies combining our results with industry or innovation metrics.
 
Our team plans to allow each member to each write part of the NLP analysis and results sections, and to equally divide the work beyond this. 
 
We will almost certainly follow Hadley Wickham’s Grammar of Data Science.